# Out-of-sample state decoding using a frozen HMM

This function applies the parameters of a previously fitted hidden
Markov model (an `epiquest_hmm` object) to new data. It allows for
freezing of the HMM parameters (transition probabilities, emission
distributions and initial state distribution) and determining the hidden
states for new data without re-estimating the model.

## Usage

``` r
run_out_of_sample_decoding(obs_data_new, hmm_frozen, seasonal = FALSE)
```

## Arguments

- obs_data_new:

  A `data.frame` containing the new observations. Must contain an
  `index` column and the same response columns (e.g., `rate` or
  `num`/`denom`) used to fit the `hmm_frozen`. If `seasonal = TRUE`, it
  must also contain a `season` column.

- hmm_frozen:

  An object of class `epiquest_hmm`. This is the fitted model object
  containing the parameters to be applied to the new data.

- seasonal:

  A logical. If `TRUE`, the function respects season boundaries in
  `obs_data_new` to prevent transitions between different seasons.

## Value

An object of class `epiquest_decode`. This is a list containing:

- `states`: The input `obs_data_new` with added columns for the
  predicted state and method used (see Details below).

- `probs`: For methods 'local' and 'filtering', the posterior
  probabilities for each of the states.

## Details

The function initializes a new `depmix` model using the structure of
`obs_data_new` and then uses
[`depmixS4::setpars`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/depmixS4/man/depmix-methods.html)
to hard-code the parameters from `hmm_frozen`.

This is particularly useful for prospective surveillance, where you want
to classify new weekly data using a model trained on historical seasons
without the new data points influencing the previously trained model.

The states can be decoded according to different methods:

- `'global'`: Uses the Viterbi algorithm to find the single **most
  likely sequence** of states across the entire time series. This
  approach outputs a single state for each data point. There are no
  associated probabilities.

- `'local'`: Assigns the state with the **highest posterior smoothing
  probability** at each specific time point.

- `'filtering'`: Similar to 'local', but performs real-time decoding,
  where the state at time *t* is determined only by observations from
  time 1 to *t*.

Comparing 'local' and 'filtering', each approach has its advantages and
disadvantages. Filtering state assignments do not use information from
the following week to determine states, so they do not use all available
information. When computed every week on new data as the data arrive,
the state assignments are stable. Local state assingments can change:
they are only stable once the data for the following week is available.

The plots generated by
[`create_hmm_plots()`](https://sciensanogit.github.io/epiquest/reference/create_hmm_plots.md)
and
[`create_loop_plots()`](https://sciensanogit.github.io/epiquest/reference/create_loop_plots.md)
all use `'local'` state assignments.
